<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Homer; Ossian; Chaucer</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<article id="homer-ossian-chaucer" epub:type="z3998:essay">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Homer; Ossian; Chaucer</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Extracts from a lecture on poetry, read before the Concord Lyceum, November 29, 1843, by Henry D. Thoreau.</p>
			</header>
			<section id="homer-ossian-chaucer-1" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Homer</h3>
				<p>The wisest definition of poetry the poet will instantly prove false by setting aside its requisitions. We can therefore publish only our advertisement of it.</p>
				<p>There is no doubt that the loftiest written wisdom is rhymed or measured, is in form as well as substance poetry; and a volume, which should contain the condensed wisdom of mankind, need not have one rhythmless line. Yet poetry, though the last and finest result, is a natural fruit. As naturally as the oak bears an acorn, and the vine a gourd, man bears a poem, either spoken or done. It is the chief and most memorable success, for history is but a prose narrative of poetic deeds. What else have the Hindus, the Persians, the Babylonians, the Egyptians, done that can be told? It is the simplest relation of phenomena, and describes the commonest sensations with more truth than science does, and the latter at a distance slowly mimics its style and methods. The poet sings how the blood flows in his veins. He performs his functions, and is so well that he needs such stimulus to sing only as plants to put forth leaves and blossoms. He would strive in vain to modulate the remote and transient music which he sometimes hears, since his song is a vital function like breathing, and an integral result like weight. It is not the overflowing of life but its subsidence rather, and is drawn from under the feet of the poet. It is enough if Homer but say the sun sets. He is as serene as nature, and we can hardly detect the enthusiasm of the bard. It is as if nature spoke. He presents to us the simplest pictures of human life, so that childhood itself can understand them, and the man must not think twice to appreciate his naturalness. Each reader discovers for himself, that succeeding poets have done little else than copy his similes. His more memorable passages are as naturally bright, as gleams of sunlight in misty weather. Nature furnishes him not only with words, but with sterotyped lines and sentences from her mint.</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>“As from the clouds appear the full moon,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All shining, and then again it goes behind the shadowy clouds</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So Hector, at one time appeared among the foremost,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And at another in the rear, commanding; and all with brass</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He shone, like to the lightning of aegis-bearing Zeus.”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>He conveys the least information, even the hour of the day, with such magnificence, and vast expense of natural imagery, as if it were a message from the gods.</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>“While it was dawn, and sacred day was advancing,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For that space the weapons of both flew fast, and the people fell;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But when now the woodcutter was preparing his morning meal</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In the recesses of the mountains, and had wearied his hands</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With cutting lofty trees, and satiety came to his mind,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And the desire of sweet food took possession of his thoughts;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then the Danaans by their valor broke the phalanxes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shouting to their companions from rank to rank.”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>When the army of the Trojans passed the night under arms, keeping watch lest the enemy should reembark under cover of the dark,</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>“They, thinking great things, upon the neutral ground of war,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sat all the night; and many fires burned for them.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As when in the heavens the stars round the bright moon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Appear beautiful, and the air is without wind;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And all the heights, and the extreme summits,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And the shady valleys appear; and the shepherd rejoices in his</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So between the ships and the streams of Xanthus</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Appeared the fires of the Trojans before Ilium.”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>The “white-armed goddess Juno,” sent by the father of gods and men for Iris and Apollo,</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>“Went down the Idaean mountains to far Olympus,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As when the mind of a man, who has come over much earth,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sallies forth, and he reflects with rapid thoughts,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There was I, and there, and remembers many things;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So swiftly the august Juno hastening flew through the air;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And came to high Olympus.”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>There are few books which are fit to be remembered in our wisest hours, but the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Iliad</i> is brightest in the serenest days, and embodies still all the sunlight that fell on Asia Minor. No modern joy or ecstasy of ours can lower its height or dim its lustre; but there it lies in the last of literature, as it were the earliest, latest production of the mind. The ruins of Egypt oppress and stifle us with their dust, foulness preserved in cassia and pitch, and swathed in linen; the death of that which ever lived. But the rays of Greek poetry struggle down to us, and mingle with the sunbeams of the recent day. The statue of Memnon is cast down, but the shaft of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Iliad</i> still meets the sun in his rising.</p>
				<p>So too, no doubt, Homer had his Homer, and Orpheus his Orpheus, in the dim antiquity which preceded them. The mythological system of the ancients, and it is still the only mythology of the moderns, the poem of mankind, interwoven so wonderfully with their astronomy, and matching in grandeur and harmony with the architecture of the Heavens themselves, seems to point to a time when a mightier genius inhabited the earth. But man is the great poet, and not Homer nor Shakespeare; and our language itself, and the common arts of life are his work. Poetry is so universally true and independent of experience, that it does not need any particular biography to illustrate it, but we refer it sooner or later to some Orpheus or Linus, and after ages to the genius of humanity, and the gods themselves.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="homer-ossian-chaucer-2" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Ossian</h3>
				<p>The genuine remains of Ossian, though of less fame and extent, are in many respects of the same stamp with the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Iliad</i> itself. He asserts the dignity of the bard no less than Homer, and in his era we hear of no other priest than he. It will not avail to call him a heathen because he personifies the sun and addresses it; and what if his heroes did “worship the ghosts of their father,” their thin, airy, and unsubstantial forms? we but worship the ghosts of our fathers in more substantial forms. We cannot but respect the vigorous faith of those heathen, who sternly believed somewhat, and are inclined to say to the critics, who are offended by their superstitious rites, don’t interrupt these men’s prayers. As if we knew more about human life and a god, than the heathen and ancients. Does English theology contain the recent discoveries?</p>
				<p>Ossian reminds us of the most refined and rudest eras, of Homer, Pindar, Isaiah, and the American Indian. In his poetry, as in Homer’s, only the simplest and most enduring features of humanity are seen, such essential parts of a man as Stonehenge exhibits of a temple; we see the circles of stone, and the upright shaft alone. The phenomena of life acquire almost an unreal and gigantic size seen through his mists. Like all older and grander poetry, it is distinguished by the few elements in the lives of its heroes. They stand on the heath, between the stars and the earth, shrunk to the bones and sinews. The earth is a boundless plain for their deeds. They lead such a simple, dry, and everlasting life, as hardly needs depart with the flest, but is transmitted entire from age to age. There are but few objects to distract their sight, and their life is as unencumbered as the course of the stars they gaze at.</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>“The wrathful kings, on cairns apart,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Look forward from behind their shields,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And mark the wandering stars,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That brilliant westward move.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">It does not cost much for these heroes to live. They want not much furniture. They are such forms of men only as can be seen afar through the mist, and have no costume nor dialect, but for language there is the tongue itself, and for costume there are always the skins of beasts and the bark of trees to be had. They live out their years by the vigor of their constitutions. They survive storms and the spears of their foes, and perform a few heroic deeds, and then,</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>“Mounds will answer questions of them,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For many future years.”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">Blind and infirm, they spend the remnant of their days listening to the lays of the bards, and feeling the weapons which laid their enemies low, and when at length they die, by a convulsion of nature, the bard allows a short misty glance into futurity, yet as clear, perchance, as their lives had been. When Mac-Roine was slain,</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>“His soul departed to his warlike sires,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To follow misty forms of boars</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In tempestuous islands bleak.”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">The hero’s cairn is erected, and the bard sings a brief significant strain, which will suffice for epitaph and biography.</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>“The weak will find his bow in the dwelling,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The feeble will attempt to bend it.”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>Compared with this simple, fibrous life, our civilized history appears the chronicle of debility, of fashion, and the arts of luxury. But the civilized man misses no real refinement in the poetry of the rudest era. It reminds him that civilization does but dress men. It makes shoes, but it does not toughen the soles of the feet. It makes cloth of finer texture, but it does not touch the skin. Inside the civilized man stands the savage still in the place of honor. We are those blue-eyed, yellow-haired Saxons, those slender, dark-haired Normans.</p>
				<p>The profession of the bard attracted more respect in those days from the importance attached to fame. It was his province to record the deeds of heroes. When Ossian hears the traditions of inferior bards, he exclaims,</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>“I straightway seize the unfutile tales,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And send them down in faithful verse.”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">His philosophy of life is expressed in the opening of the third Duan of “<span epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Ca-Lodin</span>.”</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>“Whence have sprung the things that are?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And whither roll the passing years?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where does time conceal its two heads,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In dense impenetrable gloom,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Its surface marked with heroes’ deeds alone?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I view the generations gone;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The past appears but dim;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As objects by the moon’s faint beams,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Reflected from a distant lake.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I see, indeed, the thunder-bolts of war,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But there the unmighty joyless dwell,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All those who send not down their deeds</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To far, succeeding times.”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">The ignoble warriors die and are forgotten;</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>“Strangers come to build a tower;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And throw their ashes over hand;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Somoe rusted swords appear in dust;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>One, bending forward, says,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>‘The arms belonged to heroes gone;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We never heard their praise in song.’ ”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>The grandeur of the similes is another feature which characterizes great poetry. Ossian seems to speak a gigantic and universal language. The images and pictures occupy even much space in the landscape, as if they could be seen only from the sides of mountains, and plains with a wide horizon, or across arms of the sea. The machinery is so massive that it cannot be less than natural. Oivana says to the spirit of her father, “Gey-haired Torkil of Torne,” seen in the skies,</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>“Thou glidest away like receding ships.”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">So when the hosts of Fingal and Starne approach to battle,</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>“With murmurs loud, like rivers far,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The race of Torne hither moved.”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">And when compelled to retire,</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span class="i4">“dragging his spear behind,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cudulin sank in the distang wood,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like a fie upblazing ere it dies.”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">Nor did Fingal want a proper audience when he spoke;</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>“A thousand orators inclined</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To hear the lay of Fingal.”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">The threats too would have deterred a man. Vengeance and terror were real. Trenmore threatens the young warrior, whom he meets on a foreign strand,</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>“Thy mother shall find thee pale on the shore,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>While lessening on the waves she spies</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The sails of him who slew her son.”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">If Ossian’s heroes weep, it is from excess of strength, and not from weakness, a sacrifice or libation of fertile natures, like the perspiration of stone in summer’s heat. We hardly know that tears have been shed, and it seems as if weeping were proper only for babes and heroes. Their joy and their sorrow are made of one stuff, like rain and snow, the rainbow and the mist. When Fillan was worsted in fight, and ashamed in the presence of Fingal,</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>“He strode away forthwith,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And bent in grief above a stream,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His cheeks bedewed with tears.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From time to time the thistles gray</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He lopped with his inverted lance.”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">Crodar, blind and old, receives Ossian, son of Fingal, who comes to aid him in war,</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>“ ‘My eyes have failed,’ says he, ‘Crodar is blind,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is thy strength like that of thy fathers?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Stretch, Ossian, thine arm to the hoary-haired.’</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">I gave my arm to the king.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The aged hero seized my hand;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He heaved a heavy sigh;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tears flowed incessant down his cheek.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>‘Strong art though, son of the mighty,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though not so dreadful as Morven’s prince.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="elision">⋮</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Let my feast be spread in the hall,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Let every sweet-voiced minstrel sing;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Great is he who is within my wall,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sons of wave-echoing Croma.’ ”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">Even Ossian himself, the hero-bard, pays tribute to the superior strength of his father Fingal.</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>“How beauteous, mighty man, was thy mind,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Why succeeded Ossian without its strength?”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
			<section id="homer-ossian-chaucer-3" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Chaucer</h3>
				<p>What a contrast between the stern and desolate poetry of Ossian, and that of Chaucer, and even of Shakespeare and Milton, much more of Dryden, and Pope, and Gray. Our summer of English poetry, like the Greek and Latin before it, seems well advanced toward its fall, and laden with the fruit and foliage of the season, with bright autumnal tints, but soon the winter will scatter its myriad clustering and shading leaves, and leave only a few desolate and fibrous boughs to sustain the snow and rime, and creak in the blasts of ages. We cannot escape the impression, that the Muse has stooped a little in her flight, when we come to the literature of civilized eras. Now first we hear of various ages and styles of poetry, but the poetry of runic monuments is for every age. The bard has lost the dignity and sacredness of his office. He has no more bardic rage, and only conceives the deed, which he formerly stood ready to perform. Hosts of warriors, earnest for battle, could not mistake nor dispense with the ancient bard. His lays were heard in the pauses of the fight. There was no danger of his being overlooked by his contemporaries. But now the hero and the bard are of different professions. When we come to the pleasant English verse, it seems as if the storms had all cleared away, and it would never thunder and lighten more. The poet has come within doors, and exchanged the forest and crag for the fireside, the hut of the Gael, and Stonehenge with its circles of stones, for the house of the Englishman. No hero stands at the door prepared to break forth into song or heroic action, but we have instead a homely Englishman, who cultivates the art of poetry. We see the pleasant fireside, and hear the crackling faggots in all the verse. The towering and misty imagination of the bard has descended into the plain, and become a lowlander, and keeps flocks and herds. Poetry is one man’s trade, and not all men’s religion, and is split into many styles. It is pastoral, and lyric, and narrative, and didactic.</p>
				<p>Notwithstanding the broad humanity of Chaucer, and the many social and domestic comforts which we meet with in his verse, we have to narrow our vision somewhat to consider him, as if he occupied less space in the landscape, and did not stretch over hill and valley as Ossian does. Yet, seen from the side of posterity, as the father of English poetry, preceded by a long silence of confusion in history, unenlivened by any strain of pure melody, we easily come to reverence him. Passing over the earlier continental poets, since we are bound to the pleasant archipelago of English poetry, Chaucer’s is the first name after that misty weather in which Ossian lived, which can detain us long. Indeed, though he represents so different a culture and society, he may be regarded as in many respects the Homer of the English poets. Perhaps he is the youthfullest of them all. We return to him as to the purest well, the fountain furthest removed from the highway of desultory life. He is so natural and cheerful, compared with later poets, that we might almost regard him as a personification of spring. To the faithful reader his muse has even given an aspect to his times, and when he is fresh from perusing him, they seem related to the golden age. It is stil the poetry of youth and life, rather than of thought; and though the moral vein is obvious and constant, it has not yet banished the sun and daylight from his verse The loftiest strains of the muse are, for the most part, sublimely plaintive, and not a carol as free as nature’s. The content which the sun shines to celebrate from morning to evening is unsung. The muse solaces herself, and is not ravished but consoled. There is a catastrophe implied, and a tragic element in all our verse, and less of the lark and morning dews, than of the nightingale and evening shades. But in Homer and Chaucer there is more of the innocence and serenity of youth, than in the more modern and moral poets. The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Iliad</i> is not sabbath but morning reading, and men cling to this old song, because they have still moments of unbaptized and uncommitted life, which give them an appetite for more. He represents no creed nor opinion, and we read him with a rare sense of freedom and irresponsibility, as if we trod on native ground, and were autochthones of the soil.</p>
				<p>Chaucer had eminently the habits of a literary man and a scholar. We do not enough allow for the prevalence of this class. There were never any times so stirring, that there were not to be found some sedentary stil. Through all those outwardly active ages, there were still monks in cloisters writing or copying folios. He was surrounded by the din of arms. The battles of Hallidon Hill and Neville’s Cross, and the still more memorable battles of Crecy and Poitiers, were fought in his youth, but these did not concern our poet much, Wycliffe much more. He seems to have regarded himself always as one privileged to sit and converse with books. He helped to establish the literary class. His character, as one of the fathers of the English language, would alone make his works important, even those which have little poetical merit. A great philosophical and moral poet gives permanence to the language he uses, by making the best sound convey the best sense. He was as simple as Wordsworth in preferring his homely but vigorous Saxon tongue, when it was neglected by the court, and had not yet attained to the dignity of a literature, and rendered a similar service to his country to that which Dante rendered to Italy. If Greek sufficeth for Greek, and Arabic for Arabian, and Hebrew for Jew, and Latin for Latin, then English shall suffice for him, for any of these will serve to teach truth “right as divers pathes leaden divers folke the right waye to Rome.” In the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Testament of Love</i> he writes, “Let then clerkes enditen in Latin, for they have the propertic of science, and the knowinge in that facultie, and lette Frenchmen in their Frenche also enditen their queinte termes, for it is kyndely to their mouthes, and let us showe our fantasies in soche wordes as we lerneden of our dames tonge.”</p>
				<p>He will know how to appreciate Chaucer best, who has come down to him the natural way, through the meagre pastures of Saxon and ante-Chaucerian poetry; and yet so human and wise he seems after such diet, that he is liable to misjudge him still. In the Saxon poetry extant, in the earliest English, and the contemporary Scottish poetry, there is less to remind the reader of the rudeness and vigor of youth, than of the feebleness of a declining age. It is for the most part translation or imitation merely, with only an occasional and slight tinge of poetry, and oftentimes the falsehood and exaggeration of fable, without its imagination to redeem it. It is astonishing to how few thoughts so many sincere efforts give utterance. But as they never sprang out of nature, so they will never root themselves in nature. There are few traces of original genius, and we look in vain to find antiquity restored, humanized, and made blithe again, by the discovery of some natural sympathy between it and the present. But when we come to Chaucer we are relieved of many a load. He is fresh and modern still, and no dust settles on his true passages. It lightens along the line, and we are reminded that flowers have bloomed, and birds sung, and hearts beaten, in England. Before the earnest gaze of the reader the rust and moss of time gradually drop off, and the original green life is revealed. He was a homely and domestic man, and did breathe quite as modern men do. Only one trait, one little incident of human biography needs to be truly recorded, that all the world may think the author fit to wear the laurel crown. In the earth we have described, and at this distance of time, the bare processes of living read like poetry, for all of human good or ill, heroic or vulgar, lies very near to them. All that is truly great and interesting to men, runs thus as level a course, and is as unaspiring, as the plough in the furrow.</p>
				<p>There is no wisdom which can take place of humanity, and we find <em>that</em> in Chaucer. We can expand in his breadth and think we could be that man’s acquaintance. He was worthy to be a citizen of England, while Petrarch and Boccacio lived in Italy, and Tell and Termerlane in Switzerland and in Asia, and Bruce in Scotland, and Wickliffe, and Gower, and Edward the Third, and John of Gaunt, and the Black Prince, were his own countrymen; all stout and stirring names. The fame of Roger Bacon came down from the preceding century, and the name of Dante stil exerted the influence of a living presence. On the whole, Chaucer impresses us, as greater than his reputation, and not a little like Homer and Shakespeare, for he would have held up his head in their company. Among early English poets he is the landlord and host, and has the authority of such. The affectionate mention, which succeeding early poets make of him, coupling him with Homer and Virgil, is to be taken into the account in estimating his character and influence. King James and Dunbar of Scotland speak with more love and reverence of him, than any modern author of his predecessors of the last century. The same childlike relation is without parallel now. We read him without criticism for the most part, for he pleads not his own cause, but speaks for his readers, and has that greatness of trust and reliance which compels popularity. He confides in the reader, and speaks privily with him, keeping nothing back. And in return his reader has great confidence in him, that he tells no lies, and reads his story with indulgence, as if it were the circumlocution of a child, but discovers afterwards that he has spoken with more directness and economy of words than a sage. He is never heartless,</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>“For first the thing is thought within the heart,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Er any word out from the mouth astart.”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">And so new was all his theme in those days, that he had not to invent, but only to call.</p>
				<p>We admire Chaucer for his sturdy English wit. The easy height he speaks from in his Prologue to the Canterbury Tales, as if he were equal to any of the company there assembled, is as good as any particular excellence in it. But though it is full of good sense and humanity, it is not transscendent poetry. For picturesque description of persons it is, perhaps, without a parallel in English poetry; yet it is essentially humorous, as the loftiest genius never is. Humor, however broad and genial, takes a narrower view than enthusiasm. The whole story of Chanticlere and Dame Partlett, in the Nonne’s Preeste’s tale, is genuine humanity. I know of nothing better in its kind, no more successful fabling of birds and beasts. If it is said of Shakespeare, that he is now Hamlet, and then Falstaff, it may be said of Chaucer that he sympathizes with brutes as well as men, and assumes their nature that he may speak from it. In this tale he puts on the very feathers and stature of the cock. To his own finer vein he added all the common wit and wisdom of his time, and everywhere in his works his remarkable knowledge of the world, and nice perception of character, his rare common sense and proverbial wisdom, are apparent. His genius does not soar like Milton’s, but is genial and familiar. It shows great tenderness and delicacy, but not the heroic sentiment. It is only a greater portion of humanity with all its weakness. It is not heroic, as Raleigh’s, nor pious, as Herbert’s, nor philosophical, as Shakespeare’s, but is the child of the English muse, that child which is the father of the man. It is for the most part only an exceeding naturalness, perfect sincerity, with the behavior of a child rather than of a man.</p>
				<p>Gentleness and delicacy of character is everywhere apparent in his verse. The simplest and humblest words come readily to his lips. No one can read the Prioress’ tale, understanding the spirit in which it was written, and in which the child sings, <i xml:lang="la">O alma redemptoris mater</i>, or the account of the departure of Constance with her child upon the sea, in the Man of Lawe’s tale, without feeling the native innocence and refinement of the author. Nor can we be mistaken respecting the essential purity of his character, disregarding the apology of the manners of the age. His sincere sorrow in his later days for the grossness of his earlier works, and that he “cannot recall and annull” much that he had written, “but, alas, they are now continued from man to man, and I cannot do what I desire,” is not to be forgotten. A simple pathos and feminine gentleness, which Wordsworth occasionally approaches, but does not equal, are peculiar to him. We are tempted to say, that his genius was feminine, not masculine. It was such a feminineness, however, as is rarest ot find in woman, though not the appreciation of it. Perhaps it is not to be found at all in woman, but is only the feminine in man.</p>
				<p>Such pure, childlike love of nature is not easily to be matched. Nor is it strange, that the poetry of so rude an age should contain such sweet and polished praise of nature, for her charms are not enhanced by civilization, as society’s are, but by her own original and permanent refinement she at last subdues and educates man.</p>
				<p>Chaucer’s remarkably trustful and affectionate character appears in his familiar, yet innocent and reverent, manner of speaking of his God. He comes into his thought without any false reverence, and with no more parade than the zephyr to his ear. If nature is our mother, then God is our father. There is less love and simple practical trust in Shakespeare and Milton. How rarely in our English tongue do we find expressed any affection for God. There is no sentiment so rare as the love of God. Herbert almost alone expresses it, “Ah, my dear God!” Our poet uses similar words, and whenever he sees a beautiful person, or other object, prides himself on the “maistry” of his God. He reverently recommends Dido to be his bride,</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span class="i3">“if that God that heaven and yearth made,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Would have a love for beauty and goodnesse</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And womanhede, trouth, and semeliness.”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">He supplies the place to his imagination of the saints of the Catholic calendar, and has none of the attributes of a Scandinavian deity.</p>
				<p>But, in justification of our praise, we must refer the hearer to his works themselves, to the Prologue to the Canterbury Tales, the account of Gentilesse, the Flower and the Leaf, the stories of Griselda, Virginia, Ariadne, and Blanche the Dutchesse, and much more of less distinguished merit. There are many poets of more taste and better manners, who knew how to leave out their dullness, but such negative genius cannot detain us long; we shall return to Chaucer still with love. Even the clown has taste, whose dictates, though he disregards them, are higher and purer than those which the artist obeys; and some natures, which are rude and ill-developed, have yet a higher standard of perfection, than others which are refined and well-balanced. Though the peasant’s cot is dark, it has the evening star for taper, while the nobleman’s saloon is meanly lighted. If we have to wander through many dull and prosaic passages in Chaucer, we have at least the satisfaction of knowing that it is not an artificial dullness, but too easily matched by many passsages in life, and it is, perhaps more pleasing, after all, to meet with a fine thought in its natural setting. We confess we feel a disposition commonly to concentrate sweets, and accumulate pleasures, but the poet may be presumed always to speak as a traveller, who leads us through a varied scenery, from one eminence to another, and, from time to time, a single casual thought rises naturally and inevitably, with such majesty and escort only as the first stars at evening. And surely fate has enshrined it in these circumstances for some end. Nature strews her nuts and flowers broadcast, and never collects them into heaps. This was the soil it grew in, and this the hour it bloomed in; if sun, wind, and rain, came here to cherish and expand the flower, shall not we come here to pluck it?</p>
			</section>
			<section id="homer-ossian-chaucer-4" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Poetry</h3>
				<p>A true poem is distinguished, not so much by a felicitous expression or any thought it suggests, as by the atmosphere which surrounds it. Most have beauty of outline merely, and are striking as the form and bearing of a stranger, but true verses come toward us indistinctly, as the very kernel of all friendliness, and envelope us in their spirit and fragrance. Much of our poetry has the very best manners, but no character. It is only an unusual precision and elasticity of speech, as if its author had taken, not an intoxicating draught, but an electuary. It has the distinct outline of sculpture, and chronicles an early hour. Under the influence of passion all men speak thus distinctly, but wrath is not always divine.</p>
				<p>There are two classes of men called poets. The one cultivates life, the other art; one seeks food for nutriment, the other for flavor; one satisfies hunger, the other gratifies the palate. There are two kinds of writing, both great and rare; one that of genius, or the inspired, the other of intellect and taste, in the intervals of inspiration. The former is above criticism, always correct, giving the law to criticism. It vibrates and pulsates with life forever. It is sacred, and to be read with reverence, as the works of nature are studied. There are few instances of a sustained style of this kind; perhaps every man has spoken words, but the speaker is then careless of the record. Such a style removes us out of personal relations with its author, we do not take his words on our lips, but his sense into our hearts. It is the stream of inspiration, which bubbles out, now here, now there, now in this man, now in that. It matters not through what ice-crystals it is seen, now a fountain, now the ocean stream running under ground. It is in Shakespeare, Alpheus, in Burns, Arethuse; but ever the same. The other is self-possessed and wise. It is reverent of genius, and greedy of inspiration. It is conscious in the highest and the least degree. It consists with the most perfect command of the faculties. It dwells in a repose as of the desert, and objects are as distinct in it as oases or palms in the horizon of sand. The train of thought moves with subdued and measured step like a caravan. But the pen is only an instrument in its hand, and not instinct with life, like a longer arm. It leaves a thin varnish or glaze over all its work. The works of Goethe furnish remarkable instances of the latter.</p>
				<p>There is no just and serene criticism as yet. Our taste is too delicate and particular. It says nay to the poet’s work, but never yea to his hope. It invites him to adorn his deformities, and not to caste them off by expansion, as the tree its bark. We are a people who live in a bright light, in houses of pearl and porcelain, and drink only light wines, whose teeth are easily set on edge by the least natural sour. If we had been consulted, the backbone of the earth would have been made, not of granite, but of Bristol spar. A modern author would have died in infancy in a ruder age. But the poet is something more than a scald, “a smoother and polisher of language”; he is a Cincinnatus in literature, and occupies no west end of the world, but, like the sun, indifferently selects his rhymes, and with a liberal taste weaves into his verse the planet and the stubble.</p>
				<p>In these old books the stucco has long since crumbled away, and we read what was sculptured in the granite. They are rude and massive in their proportions, rather than smooth and delicate in their finish. The workers in stone polish only their chimney ornaments, but their pyramids are roughly done. There is a soberness in a rough aspect, as of unhewn granite, which addresses a depth in us, but a polished surface hits only the ball of the eye. The true finish is the work of time and the use to which a thing is put. The elements are still polishing the pyramids. Art may varnish and gild, but it can do no more. A work of genius is rough-hewn from the first, because it anticipates the lapse of time, and has an ingrained polish, which stil appears when fragments are broken off, an essential quality of its substance. Its beauty is at the same time its strength, and it breaks with a lustre. The great poem must have the stamp of greatness as well as its essence. The reader easily goes within the shallowest contemporary poetry, and informs it with all the life and promise of the day, as the pilgrim goes within the temple, and hears the faintest strains of the worshippers; but it will have to speak to posterity, traversing these deserts through the ruins of its outmost walls, by the grandeur and beauty of its proportions.</p>
			</section>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
